Require with custom error (#14913)
ethereum/solidity: docs/contracts/errors.rst

.. index:: ! error, revert, require, ! selector; of an error
.. _errors:

*************
Custom Errors
*************

Errors in Solidity provide a convenient and gas-efficient way to explain to the
user why an operation failed. They can be defined inside and outside of contracts (including interfaces and libraries).

They have to be used together with the :ref:`revert statement <revert-statement>`
or the :ref:`require function <assert-and-require-statements>`.
In the case of ``revert`` statements, or ``require`` calls where the condition is evaluated to be false,
all changes in the current call are reverted, and the error data passed back to the caller.

> Below is an example of custom error usage with the ``revert`` statement:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below shows custom error usage with the ``revert`` statement:
```
Just a suggestion/nitpick. Not necessary.

        // ...
    }

And the same again with the ``require`` statement:

.. code-block:: solidity

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity ^0.8.26;

    /// Insufficient balance for transfer. Needed `required` but only
    /// `available` available.
    /// @param available balance available.
    /// @param required requested amount to transfer.
    error InsufficientBalance(uint256 available, uint256 required);

    // This will only compile with via-ir
    contract TestToken {
        mapping(address => uint) balance;
        function transfer(address to, uint256 amount) public {

>             require(amount > balance[msg.sender], InsufficientBalance(balance[msg.sender], amount));

Reviewer 2: Seems like a lot of boilerplate just to show off a single line. Maybe it could be incorporated into the original example?

Author: Yup, I could rename the function in the original example to `transferWithRevertError` and paste this one in the above contract as `transferWithRequireError`, but then I'd have to bump the version to `0.8.26` and slap an `// This will only compile with via-ir`, which would be confusing with regards to the `revert InsufficientBalance{...}` function. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: I think it would be fine. You can always clarify it by adding a short comment above the `require` saying that this is the new form, available only via IR and above `if` that it works both with IR and legacy.

I think that the overall improvement in readability is worth it. As a reader I think I'd rather have it in one snippet where I can clearly see what differs rather than have two separate snippets I have to compare.

Author: I dunno, I honestly think that cramming both examples into one and then having to differentiate them with in code comments just to avoid and extra 20 lines help with readability.

Reviewer 2: We often use comments in examples this way, highlighting various details, so this seems perfectly natural to me. On the other hand using two full examples for such a tiny detail is just unnecessary padding. Making it longer does not make it more readable.

Another issue here is that documenting it this way puts emphasis on the wrong thing. The example we need here is one that shows the use of custom errors. This can be easily done in one function using both `require` and `revert` - would actually be best to rewrite it that way. The fact that you can also use the `if ... revert` pattern instead of `require` is just a footnote. It could by itself be just a comment or a note below the example.

            balance[msg.sender] -= amount;
            balance[to] += amount;
        }
        // ...
    }

.. note::
    Functions are evaluated unconditionally within error constructors, so take special care in such cases in order
    to make sure that such a function call does not have unexpected side-effects.
    For example, in ``require(condition, CustomError(f());``, function ``f()`` will be called regardless of whether

>     the supplied condition is ``true`` or ``false``.

Reviewer 2: I'd say "error constructor calls" to make it clearer, and also I think this should be more general not to create an impression that `require()` with custom errors behaves differently from the existing variant in that regard. How about this?
```
    ``require`` arguments are evaluated unconditionally, so take special care to make sure that
    they are not expressions with unexpected side-effects.
    For example, in ``require(condition, CustomError(f()));`` and ``require(condition, f());``,
    function ``f()`` will be called regardless of whether the supplied condition is ``true`` or ``false``.
```

Maybe we should also move it to the section about `require()`.

Also, we seem to have a short explanation about `require()` in [the subcurrency example in intro to smart contracts](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/develop/introduction-to-smart-contracts.html#subcurrency-example). I think it would be good to have such a warning there so that newbies encounter it immediately. The example could be updated to use custom errors and this new form of `require`.

    }

And the same again with the ``require`` statement:

.. code-block:: solidity

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity ^0.8.26;

    /// Insufficient balance for transfer. Needed `required` but only
    /// `available` available.
    /// @param available balance available.
    /// @param required requested amount to transfer.
    error InsufficientBalance(uint256 available, uint256 required);

    // This will only compile with via-IR
    contract TestToken {
        mapping(address => uint) balance;
        function transfer(address to, uint256 amount) public {
            require(amount > balance[msg.sender], InsufficientBalance(balance[msg.sender], amount));
            balance[msg.sender] -= amount;
            balance[to] += amount;
        }
        // ...
    }

.. note::
    Functions are evaluated unconditionally within error constructor calls, so take special care in such cases in order
    to make sure that such a function call does not have unexpected side-effects.
    For example, in ``require(condition, CustomError(f()));``, function ``f()`` will be called regardless of whether
    the supplied condition is ``true`` or ``false``.

> Another important thing to mention when it comes to using ``require`` with custom errors, is that memory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another important detail to mention when it comes to using ``require`` with custom errors, is that memory
```
Again, just a suggestion/nitpick.

allocation for the error-based revert reason will only happen in the reverting case, which, along with
optimization of constants and string literals makes this about as gas-efficient as the
``if (!condition) revert CustomError(args)`` pattern.

Errors cannot be overloaded or overridden but are inherited.
The same error can be defined in multiple places as long as the scopes are distinct.

> Instances of errors can only be created using ``revert`` statements, or as the second argument to ``require`` statements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instances of errors can only be created using ``revert`` statements, or as the second argument to ``require`` function.
```
